# Why Webpack

## What is Webpack

- Webpack is a JavaScript module bundler and task runner (via plugins).
- Webpack relies on modules.

## Why use it

- Bundles application made of modules
- Lets you write any module format (mixed!) - ES2015, CommonJS (AMD)
- Supports code splitting at build time
- ES6 modules are slow in the browser - do not use them.
- Vast ecosystem of plugins and loaders
- Extremely configurable
- Webpack is the most performant way to ship JavaScript (as of 2019)

## How to use it

> _Prerequisites: There must be nodejs and npm installed on the system_

1. Create an application folder for instance `learning-webpack`
2. Inside that folder create a package.json.

```bash
mkdir learning-webpack
cd learning-webpack
npm init -y # -y generates *package.json*; fro more control - skip it
npm install webpack webpack-cle --save-dev
```

We can then run the executable by navigating to the `.bin/` folder inside /node_modules. Something like this, depending on the location of the `.bin/` folder:

```bash
$ node_modules/.bin/webpack
...
```

Great! The tool works, but we are getting an error.

```bash
WARNING in configuration
The 'mode' option has not been set, webpack will fallback to 'production' for this value. Set 'mode' option to 'development' or 'production' to enable defaults for each environment.
You can also set it to 'none' to disable any default behavior. Learn more: https://webpack.js.org/configuration/mode/

ERROR in Entry module not found: Error: Can't resolve './src' in 'E:\Programming\react-lab\learning-webpack'
```

Webpack expects there to be a folder `src/` inside our application directory. There should also be an index file - `index.js` for example, so that webpack has something to compile. Let's create that file in the newly created `src/` folder and restart the webpack command.No matter that the index.js file is empty, this time we should get a successful build message :

```bash
Hash: 98b03af40b535f1241bf
Version: webpack 4.41.5
Time: 410ms
Built at: 01/14/2020 9:31:39 PM
  Asset       Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
main.js  930 bytes       0  [emitted]  main
Entrypoint main = main.js
[0] ./src/index.js 0 bytes {0} [built]
...
```

We also get a newly created `dist/` directory with a `main.js` file inside.This is our distributable js bundle.

Now instead of typing `$ node_modules/.bin/webpack` every time we want to build our application we could create an entry inside our package.json file.

```json
//package.json
{
  ...
  "scripts":{
    "build":"webpack",
    ...
  }
}
```

Now we can build our bundle by running:

```bash
npm run build
```

Webpack warns us that no mode option has been set in the configuration, so it falls back to 'production'. The production mode is what we need if we want to deploy our bundle to production. But most of the time we will spend on development of our application, so for better dev experience we should set the mode to 'development'. We can do that inside the package.json like this:

```json
{
  ...
  "scripts":{
    "build":"webpack",
    "dev":"npm run build -- --mode development",
    "prod":"npm run build -- --mode production"
    ...
  }
}
```

Now we can run `npm run dev` or `npm run prod` depending on our needs.

To set up the webpack development server we have to install it and configure a new script

```bash
npm install webpack-dev-server
```

And in `package.json` we adjust as follows:

```json
{
  ...
  "scripts":{
    "webpack-dev-server":"webpack-dev-server",
    "build":"webpack",
    "dev":"npm run webpack-dev-server -- --mode development",
    "prod":"npm run build -- --mode production"
    ...
  }
}
```

## Core concepts of webpack

- Entry
- Output
- Loaders
- Plugins

### Loaders

Loader load modules that are not JavaScript. For example `.css` files.
We have to configure loaders in our `webpack.config.js` file. Loaders are executed per file, meaning that they do not have the whole context of the application and webpack.

```js
module.exports = ({ mode }) => {
  return {
    mode,
    output: {
      filename: "bundle.js"
    },
    plugins: [new HtmlWebpackPlugin(), new webpack.ProgressPlugin()],
    module: {
      rules: [
        {
          test: /\.css$/,
          use: ["style-loader", "css-loader"]
        }
      ]
    }
  };
};
```

In the code above we define a rule for `.css` files, by telling webpack to use `css-loader` and `style-loader` whenever it encounters modules with the `.css` extension.

> _NOTE: Loader are executed from right to left in the use array_

#### Essential loaders

Styling:

- css-loader :
- style-loader :

### Plugins

Plugins extend the features of webpack. Webpack itself uses plugins to extend it's functionalities.

#### Essential plugins

- html-webpack-plugin => creates an index.html file in the `dist` folder with injected all the outputs of the build process.

## Hot Module Reloading

Webpack dev server can update the browser without refreshing the page.
This is useful when we have an interface with complex state and we want to keep it between code updates.
